Update editor guidelines re: standardising database_cross_reference and contributor annotations (#2058)
obophenotype/cell-ontology: docs/editing_guidelines.md

ORCID identifiers may also be used when the only available source for an assertion is an individual researcher. This should be done sparingly.

**Technical details of adding a cross-reference using Protégé**:

For all: In the "Create Annotation" window, select the annotation property **database_cross_reference**.

> If the cross-reference can be represented as a CURIE and is not an ORCID: Enter the CURIE, using the bioregistry standard prefix, as a Value on the "Literal" tab. Leave Datatype empty.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the cross-reference can be represented as a CURIE and is not an ORCID: Enter the CURIE, using the [bioregistry OBO context](https://bioregistry.io/context/obo) prefix ([link to prefixmap](https://github.com/biopragmatics/bioregistry/blob/main/exports/contexts/obo.context.jsonld), as a Value on the "Literal" tab. Leave Datatype empty.
```

Reviewer 2: Of note, the “bioregistry OBO context” seems to recommend using `DOI` instead of `doi` as the “prefix” for DOI identifiers, which is against both what is recommended by the DOI specification and what we recommend ourselves slightly earlier in this very document.

Reviewer: Additionally, this is against bioregistry itself - it is a manual override done by the OBO context because most ontologies refer to dois using capital prefix. I am not opposed to trying to make a change here, but I would say we should stick to the context and debate capitalisation in that context rather than here

Author: For the purpose of this documentation, should the advise be to follow the [bioregistry standard](https://bioregistry.io/registry/doi) (doi) or the [OBO context](https://bioregistry.io/context/obo) (DOI)?

Reviewer: I cant make that call alone, but I would prefer OBO context.

Author: Added to CL meeting agenda

Reviewer: I think the people at your meeting wont be able to answer that question; its better to ask @anitacaron to raise it at the OBO ontology tech call (which as it so happens is also today), because this should not be decided on an ontology by ontology level.

Author: > I think the people at your meeting wont be able to answer that question; its better to ask @anitacaron to raise it at the OBO ontology tech call (which as it so happens is also today), because this should not be decided on an ontology by ontology level.

@anitacaron, can you raise this issue and the [one on URL links below](https://github.com/obophenotype/cell-ontology/pull/2058#discussion_r1256022366) at the OBO onto tech call?

Reviewer 3: Sure

Author: Per @anitacaron, it was decided that `doi:` should be the standard.

> Non-CURIE values (e.g., URLs) are discouraged, but when used are also entered the same way, i.e., as a literal string with no Datatype selected.

Reviewer: I would recommend to forbid them, and use rdfs:seeAlso for URLs. A URL is not a "database cross reference" even when the meaning is stretched.

> In cases where more than one CURIE is available for a resource, e.g., both a PMID and a doi are available, there is no preference for one over the other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In cases where more than one CURIE is available for a resource, e.g., both a PMID and a doi are available, we recommend using PMID by default, as it is a more _semantically meaningful_ identifier: you can immediately see that the cross-reference is to a paper, while a doi could be essentially anything. However, both doi and PMID are acceptable.
```

@bvarner-ebi this is my personal preference, it is a bit more "guiding" them simply saying "it does not matter". What do you think?

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, @matentzn. How about:

In cases where more than one CURIE is available for a resource, either is acceptable, but using the more semantically specific identifier is recommended. For example, when both a PMID and a doi are available for a resource, using the PMID is recommended since it indicates the cross-reference points to a paper, as opposed to a doi which could point to any digital object.

> If the cross-reference is an ORCID, enter the ORCID as an IRI in the IRI field on the “IRI Editor” tab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the cross-reference is an ORCID, enter the ORCID as an IRI in the IRI field on the "IRI Editor" tab, for example `https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7356-1779`.
```

> To restate, in all cases except ORCIDs, the CURIE is preferred and entered as a literal string. For ORCIDs, the IRI is preferred and is entered as an IRI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To restate, in all cases except ORCIDs, the CURIE is preferred and entered as a literal string. ORCIDs MUST be entered as an IRI.
```

The above instructions apply whether the cross-reference is added to another annotation (e.g., annotating a text defintion or comment) or adding to the overall class (i.e., not an annotation of another annotation). 

## Term contributors

>  When adding an ORCID to identify a term contributor, in the "Create Annotation" window, select the annotation property **dcterms:contributor**. The ORCID is still entered as an IRI on the “IRI Editor” tab.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When adding an ORCID to identify a term contributor, in the "Create Annotation" window, select the annotation property **dcterms:contributor**. The ORCID is still entered as an IRI on the “IRI Editor” tab.
```
